High in this video we'll look at the code for the rational numbers video.
So the first thing we'll need to do is to import all fractions class from the module.
So we'll say from We'll actually just import the fractioned class from fractions which is the module
name import fraction of a capital F which is the class remember that naming convention that we talked
about earlier in the course where all packages and modules use lower case letters and classes used an
uppercase letter for the first letter.
So it's just following that convention there.
Now we can take a look at some help on that.
Fraction objects a fraction class.
I can certainly just you know go to Google and do a search for that.
Look up the Python documentation or you can also get help directly here within Python and we can call
it this way.
Right.
Just the same way we did with integers.
So here it will give you some information about the fractioned class.
Will talk to you about the different constructors.
So let's look at the constructors and the first one is you know we can just use a single integer number.
What that means is that it's going to use the constructor that takes in a numerator and denominator.
But here the denominator is not specified with just specified the numerator.
We haven't specified the denominator so the denominator will default to 1.
And in fact we get fraction 1 over 1.
Now you can also if you want write it this way.
Denominator because 1.
Right.
And then maybe we want to do our numerator equals two.
You can write it that way.
Right.
You can name your parameters.
You can also just write it this fraction one comma to the advantage by the way of using named parameters.
Here is that if we take this I mean copy paste and we'll write here.
Numerator and denominator.
Now I don't have to specify the numerator and denominator in the specific sequence.
We can do it this way and it still works just fine.
So just a side note so we can use those kinds of constructors that use the denominator and the numerator.
And we have other constructors as well that we discussed right.
We can look at a fraction of 0.1 to five which we know should be one eighth.
And that's in fact what we get.
We can also use a string.
So we might say 0.1 to 5 is a string that would work just as well.
Right.
All of which is really interesting.
With that say fraction 22 divided by seven so our string looks like a fraction.
And Python will be able to pass that and return a fraction of 22 over 7.
Now we also have all the different arithmetic operators that we can use.
So for example let's say X equals fraction to comma 3 let's say y equals fraction 3 com 4.
OK.
So now for example let's do something like.
X plus Y which is two thirds plus three quarters.
Well there will be 17 over 12.
And if you want you can check that.
But as you can see the common for the greatest common denominator would be 12.
Right.
So we end up with four twelves here and nine twelves years eight sorry eight 12 and nine twelves and
so eight plus nine to 17 divided by 12.
So that seems like.
That's correct.
So we can also say X times Y.
Next time y will be one half two thirds times three quarters is one half and you can do X divided by
Y as well and so forth.
So all the arithmetic operators work and they will always return a fraction type object.
Now fractions also remember I mentioned are automatically reduced.
So if we look at fraction of eight divided by 16 we'll 8:16 says really one half.
And in fact that's what Python does for us.
As you can see it return.
Fraction 1 come to.
Also we talked about the negative numbers so if we do one common negative for which is negative one
quarter what we can put the negative sign above or below the line it doesn't matter it's mathematically
equivalent.
And Python will choose to put the negative sign with the numerator.
Speaking of numerator we can recover the numerator and denominator of a fraction.
So let's say we do this.
X equals.
Fraction 1 common negative for K which remembers this one with a negative sign.
Come before we can recover the numerator by looking at the numerator property of that object that will
return negative 1.
And similarly we can look at the denominator by looking at that property.
And we get the denominator back so that's how you get the numerator and denominator.
Now one thing we talked about was the fact that floats have a finite precision right so any real number
in Python is represented using a finite number of digits and therefore they're actually all rational
numbers.
And to look at that we're going to work with some irrational numbers like pi and square root of two.
So let's go ahead and say X equals fraction of math dot pi.
OK so if we print out X this is the fraction that we get.
Now what's the equivalent float.
Well that's the float that it's representing.
But you can see that we have a rational number.
Now pi is not rational.
The only reason we get irrational number is because pi in our computer can only be represented up to
a certain limited number of digits.
Therefore it's a rational number therefore it can be expressed as a fraction.
Similarly if we say I'll use y equals fraction of math that's the square root of 2.
Then when we print y.
Well let's just print Y and then if we look at the float of y you all will get off one point for one
for something which we would expect.
But because again it has a finite representation.
It is a rational number.
And this is the equivalent fraction that can be used to approximate square root of 2.
So even though they are irrational we can still approximate them.
OK.
Now I'll actually want to point out that not all floating point numbers can be represented precisely
or exactly in a computer.
And we'll get to that in an upcoming video on floats.
But let's look at one eighth or zero point one to five.
So I say April 0 1 1 2 5.
Now if we print this out.
OK so if we print a it tells us 0.1 to 5.
Great.
That looks good.
Now let's take be equal to zero point three three tenths right.
And let's print out 0.3.
Looks good right.
So now let's look at the fraction of a while 1 8.
That's good that's what we expected.
And let's look at the fraction of B and we would expect three tenths.
But that's not what we get.
We get something that really looks pretty awful.
So what's going on.
Well remember what I said earlier 0.3 cannot be represented exactly what it looks like it is.
Right.
When we print B we get 0.3.
We get 0.3 that looks exact.
Well the problem is that Python is kind of hiding stuff from us because it's trying to give us a nice
display.
So it's really a display issue here.
It's displaying 0.3.
But that's not in reality what's actually being stored.
Even though we specified She was precisely equal to zero point three in order to see that we can format
the number and force Python to give us more significant digits in the display.
So for example we might say format b and give us five decimal you know five digits after the decimal
point and we get 0.3 0 0 0 0.
That looks fine right.
That still looks exact.
So let's pump it up.
Let's go to maybe let's let's look at 15 digits right after the decimal point.
And that still looks good.
Right.
So let's come that up further.
And this time we'll go to like 25.
And now we'll start seeing the difference.
So now you can see that 0.3 is not actually Stalder 0.3 in Python it's Dardus 0.2 9 all these nines.
But then you see 8 8 8 right.
It's not 0.3.
And so because of that when we look at the fraction of B we get that that's why we get that huge fraction.
Now if we know that all float you know has a certain number and has a certain constraint on how big
you know that denominator can become then we can use that limit denominator method to actually you know
get in or get an approximation of this float here using a fraction whose denominator doesn't exceed
a certain amount.
And so we could do something like this if we say X equals fraction of 0.3.
OK then we can say X not limit the denominator and we can specify that the limit let's say would be
10.
So we don't want to nominators greater than 10 and we get three tenths back right.
So now we have all three tenths.
So of course this works of any floating point number.
So we could say X equals fraction of math that pi.
OK so if we print X in front of this way we get this fraction over here we can look at the floating
point equivalent of x.
That's three point 1 4 1 5 et cetera.
That's an approximation of pi pi being of course irrational and actually transcendental.
You don't get a finite number of digits to represent by and it never you know you never get recurring
digits so or recurring sequences of digits.
I should say to be more precise so we can get approximations of Pi with other fractions by using the
limit denominator.
So we might say X darksome limit denominator and we'll limit the denominator to 10 let's say.
So what's the closest fraction that we can get to X but with a denominator of no greater than 10.
And so we get 22 over 7.
And if we look at 22 divided by seven.
Well that's approximately PI right 3.1 4.
And then after that it all falls off.
But of course we can go further we can say limit denominator let's say 100 and we get 3 1 2 1 3 111
over 99 and you can go further if you want let's say 10000.
Well you know for 10000.
It still sticks to 113.
So how about a hundred thousand.
Now we get this fraction here.
And if we're trying to evaluate that fraction we can do it in one of two ways I guess.
Let's do it this way.
I'll copy that and copy this one.
And there we go.
OK.
That's our approximation to pi.
Now using a fraction whose denominator cannot exceed 100000.
All right.
So that can be pretty useful when you want to constrain your denominator.
Thanks for watching and I'll see you in the upcoming video on floats.